JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
President Trump
touts his economic plans at a
Boeing plant
in South Carolina, while in
Washington, the
Senate approves Scott Pruitt a
climate change
skeptic, to head the EPA.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Then, a long
journey to the
U.S. for an Iraqi interpreter
and his family,
at first blocked by the
president's travel
ban.
ABDUL HAMID ABDUL GHANI,
Immigrant: I was
like, it's over.
All the dreams that I had,
everything that
I planned has just vanished from
my life.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Plus, nearly a
month into
the Trump administration, a
nation as divided
as ever.
We travel to two cities in Texas
to hear from
Americans who support and oppose
the new president.
JOYCE KNOLLE, Texas: I was so
excited when
he won, because I just believed
in everything
that he says.
ISHRAT KUNDAWALA, Texas: I'm
pretty sure that
I fit almost every demographic
that's going
to be ruined by this
administration, and I
feel like I have to speak out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
give their take
on the president's Thursday news
conference
and the rest of the week's news.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fresh off his
White House news
conference, the president is
out, touting
his first four weeks in office.
He flew to Florida today for the
holiday weekend,
with a campaign-like stop on the
way there.
Lisa Desjardins has our report.
LISA DESJARDINS: For President
Trump with
grandchildren in tow a chance to
leave Washington
behind.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
I love South Carolina.
I love it.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: After a
roller-coaster week,
he found a friendly audience at
Boeing's North
Charleston plant.
DONALD TRUMP: We're here today
to celebrate
American engineering and
American manufacturing.
We're also here today to
celebrate jobs.
Jobs.
LISA DESJARDINS: Underscoring
the point, Mr.
Trump touted the rollout of
Boeing's 787-10
Dreamliner plane.
DONALD TRUMP: I campaigned on
the promise
that I will do everything in my
power to bring
those jobs back into America.
We wanted to make much easier,
it has to be
much easier to manufacture in
our country
and much harder to leave.
LISA DESJARDINS: The president
also pushed
back at Boeing, telling
reporters its price
for the new Air Force One and
that of Lockheed's
F-35 fighter are still too high,
and he's
negotiating.
All of this one day after
defending his record
at a freewheeling White House
news conference.
DONALD TRUMP: This
administration is running
like a fine-tuned machine.
LISA DESJARDINS: Today, another
top Republican,
Senate Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell, held
his own news conference,
praising the Trump
agenda, but criticizing
distractions.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: I
have been pretty candid with
him, and with
all of you, that I'm not a great
fan of daily
tweets, but what I am a fan of
is what he's
been actually doing.
I have not been a fan of the
extra discussion
that he likes to engage in.
But we're going to soldier on.
We like his positions and we're
going to pursue
them as vigorously as we can.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meanwhile, the
president
is back at the drawing boards on
finding a
national security adviser, after
Michael Flynn
was forced out.
The president tweeted this
morning that that
-- quote -- "General Keith
Kellogg, who I
have known for a long time, is
very much in
play for NSA, as are three
others."
Whoever it is will be choice
number two, after
retired Vice Admiral Robert
Harward turned
down the job, calling it a --
quote -- "purely
personal issue."
He didn't address reports that
he balked at
being denied his choice of
staffers.
White House officials say the
president may
interview candidates for the
post this weekend
at his Mar-a-Lago resort in
Florida.
Tomorrow, he will hold what the
White House
calls a campaign event, in
Melbourne, Florida.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lisa joins me
now.
So, Lisa, campaign event?
We thought it just ended.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
No, it hasn't.
It's just building up now.
In fact, the president himself
announced that
that rally in Florida will be
happening as
a rally, and Sean Spicer said
last week that
that's going to be a campaign
event.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, you were --
also, you
and I were talking a little
while ago, Lisa,
and you were saying that some of
the people
around the president are
creating some fund-raising
vehicles?
Tell us about that.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes, that's
right.
And these are the things like
super PACs.
We have seen the president have
a super PAC
before, the Great America PAC,
for example.
But now, in just the last weeks,
some of his
main campaign alums have formed
one that's
called the America First,
501(c)(4).
We expect more on how much money
they have
next week, but they say they're
going after
things like supporting Judge
Gorsuch, Obamacare,
all of that.
And one other note about the
president's campaign.
What's so unprecedented here,
Judy, is that
he actually filed his campaign
paperwork on
January 20.
President Obama, for example, he
waited two
years before officially
inaugurating his reelection
campaign.
So, this is unprecedented
territory.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Really
interesting.
And I know reporters will
continue to ask
him about it.
Lisa Desjardins, thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
The U.S. Senate confirmed
President Trump's
pick to lead the Environmental
Protection
Agency 52-46.
Scott Pruitt was Oklahoma's
attorney general,
and in that role, he's
repeatedly sued the
EPA to rein in regulations.
Democrats tried, and failed, to
delay today's
confirmation vote until Pruitt
releases thousands
of e-mails with oil and gas
executives.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: It's
not the worst thing in the world
to take a
few extra days to properly vet
someone who
will have immense power over our
nation's
streams, skies, even the lead
level in our
homes and water supply.
Those e-mails could contain
material information
about his confirmation.
SEN.
JOHN BARRASSO (R), Wyoming:
Government agencies
like the EPA, and one after
another, need
their leadership in place, and
they need it
in place now.
What they don't need, what the
American people
don't need is more political
theater from
the Senate Democrats.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Pruitt was
strongly opposed
by environmental groups, who
warn he will
roll back enforcement efforts.
He was sworn in this afternoon.
We will take a closer look right
after the
news summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Pakistan, the
military says
it killed more than 100 people
it calls terrorists
in sweeping anti-terror raids.
They came a day after a suicide
bombing, claimed
by the Islamic State, killed at
least 88.
Protesters took to the streets
today to denounce
weak security.
Pakistan has been hit by a spate
of deadly
attacks in recent days.
Another Islamic State bombing
killed 59 people
in Iraq yesterday.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The World
Meteorological
Organization reports the sea ice
pack in the
Arctic and Antarctic was the
smallest ever
for the month of January.
The U.N. agency also says
concentrations of
heat-trapping carbon dioxide hit
a record.
Meanwhile, NASA satellites
captured part of
the ice loss.
This was the Pine Island Glacier
in Antarctic
earlier in January.
A separate image showed an
iceberg the size
of Manhattan that broke away on
January 31.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A powerful new
storm barreled
into California today, bringing
what could
be the heaviest rain in years.
The rain and high winds lashed
the Southern
California coastline,
threatening flooding
and mudslides, and forcing
small-scale evacuations.
The storm is expected to skirt
Northern California,
but officials kept watch on the
Lake Oroville
Dam and its damaged spillways.
WILLIAM CROYLE, California
Department of Water
Resources: We have a very close
communication,
our monitoring teams, between
our incident
commanders to make sure that we
have all eyes
on this and we're ready to take
action with
our mitigation plan.
I don't see that that's a risk
at this time.
But, having said that, we're
ready.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another storm
system is expected
to hit Northern California late
Sunday night
and could bring 30 hours of
precipitation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Wall Street
headed into
the President's Day weekend with
a lackluster
session.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained four
points to close at 20624.
The Nasdaq rose 23 points, and
the S&P 500
added almost four.
For the week, all three indexes
gained 1.5
percent or better.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a passing of
note.
A longtime former minority
leader of the House
of Representatives, Bob Michel,
has died.
The Illinois Republican served
19 terms, but
retired just before the GOP won
back the majority
in the House in 1994.
He is credited with helping
President Reagan
and the first President Bush
push their agendas,
by negotiating with Democrats.
Bob Michel was 93 years old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
two Texas
cities, a microcosm of the
nation's deep political
divide; Mark Shields and David
Brooks analyze
the week's news; an actor caught
up in the
Oscars-so-white controversy
stars in a new
film about controversial love;
and much more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now that Scott
Pruitt is
in charge of the EPA, we take a
look at what
to expect from the agency under
his leadership
with Myron Ebell, director of
the Competitive
Enterprise Institute, a
libertarian advocacy
group.
He oversaw President Trump's EPA
transition
team and has been a vocal
opponent of many
of the agency's policies.
And Jeremy Symons of the
Environmental Defense
Fund, a group strongly opposed
to Pruitt's
confirmation.
All right, Myron, let me start
with you.
You're someone that thinks that
climate science
in some ways is alarmist.
And we're not here to debate
that tonight.
We have you on because you
likely have insight
into why Scott Pruitt is head of
the EPA today.
So, my first question to you is,
is someone
who shared your views on climate
science,
was that one of the
preconditions and prerequisites
to get this job and make you
interested in
getting that person the head of
the EPA?
MYRON EBELL, Director,
Competitive Enterprise
Institute: I wasn't involved in
the personnel
decisions of the Trump
transition.
And I'm not a part of the Trump
administration.
I think that what President
Trump was looking
for when he nominated Scott
Pruitt was someone
who would be a really able
advocate and implementer
of the president's agenda for
the EPA, and
I think Scott Pruitt is a great
choice.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This is the
first time in
the EDF history that you have
gone out and
opposed the nomination.
Why?
JEREMY SYMONS, Environmental
Defense Fund:
Well, it's because Scott Pruitt
is so extreme.
And this fight isn't over,
because when you
look at his record of suing the
EPA that he's
now going to lead 14 times to
undermine clean
air and clean water protections,
that doesn't
bode well for what he is going
to try to do
when he gets in.
Myron got his man, right?
At the end of the day, this is
about protecting
public health.
It's the Environmental
Protection Agency.
And we have someone at the head
now who wants
to take the agency backward,
instead of forward.
And that's not good for
children's health.
It's not good for protecting the
elderly or
anyone who is vulnerable to air
pollutions,
to toxic chemicals or to water
pollution like
lead.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Myron, you
said the president's
positions, and this is what was
most important.
The president on the campaign
trail, even
on a debate stage said that he
would like
to cut the EPA down
significantly.
Why does Scott Pruitt help the
president advance
that agenda?
MYRON EBELL: Scott Pruitt has
been a very
strong advocate for devolving
more of the
work of the EPA to the states.
And, in fact, the EPA already
has the states
doing a lot of its work, but it
still has
a very large bureaucracy
nonetheless.
I think Scott Pruitt understands
that the
EPA can be a lot smaller than it
is and we
will still have the same levels
of environmental
protection for clean air and
clean water,
because the states are already
doing the work.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The EPA has
shrunk even
under President Obama's term.
Can it be even smaller?
JEREMY SYMONS: Look, we have
worked with the
Environmental Protection Agency
across Republican
and Democratic presidents.
And it's not an issue of --
where we go from
here has to be maintaining EPA's
capability
and capacity to get the job
done.
Scott Pruitt, when he took over
as attorney
general in Oklahoma, he got rid
of the environmental
enforcement division.
If he does that for the EPA,
that means trouble
anywhere in this country from
Florida to Ohio.
We have to make sure that we
remain vigilant
and that we hold the senators
that voted for
him by the narrowest of margins
and Scott
Pruitt accountable for what he
does.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jeremy Symons,
what are
the most immediate things that
you're concerned
about?
What can Scott Pruitt do once he
is in the
job?
He is one individual, it's a
large agency,
the rules take time to change.
JEREMY SYMONS: Well, Myron and
the transitions
recommended that they cut the
EPA by half.
We're talking gutting core
capacities like
enforcement, like science, the
health studies
that need to happen to make sure
that pollution
is controlled.
We're worried about enforcement,
like what
he did in Oklahoma.
We're worried about interfering
with science.
But if you look just at the
lawsuits that
Scott Pruitt filed to try to
roll back things
like mercury standards, arguing
that mercury
isn't a threat to the unborn --
because it
is, and science says it is, and
quite clearly
across many studies.
If you add all those lawsuits
up, if you took
away those rules he was
attacking, we would
see 850,000 more asthma attacks
every year.
That is unacceptable.
So we're going to be keeping
score in terms
of, are we moving forward or
moving back?
The Pruitt that we saw in front
of the Senate
said he cared about EPA's
mission and would
move us forward, but his record
says otherwise.
We're waiting to see which
Pruitt shows up.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Myron, one of
the concerns
has been Mr. Pruitt's record.
The Competitive Enterprise
Institute is in
some ways funded by the fossil
fuel industry,
but Scott Pruitt was a friend to
the fossil
fuel industry, to put it mildly,
in Oklahoma.
There is a famous incident of
him basically
copy-pasting an e-mail or a
concern from the
energy -- directly to the EPA.
What is he likely to do?
Because at the hearings, he said
that he understands
that it is an incredibly
important job, especially
when it comes to the role in
regulating CO2.
MYRON EBELL: Jeremy has
mentioned these 14
lawsuits.
I'm proud that my organization,
CEI, is a
co-plaintiff with Attorney
General Scott Pruitt
in several of these lawsuits.
These are meant to shrink EPA's
overreach,
its illegal regulatory
overreach.
I think, when you look at
Oklahoma, Oklahoma
is a big oil and gas producer.
They're proud of it.
They produce the energy that we
use.
Of course Scott Pruitt supports
that industry.
It's Oklahoma's major industry,
and it helps
the entire nation.
So I think, if you look back at
what President
Trump said in the campaign, he
said, I want
to get rid of the regulatory
rampage that
is killing investment and jobs
in our resource
and manufacturing industries,
and I want to
make America the world's energy
superpower.
So I think Scott Pruitt will
have a vital
role in shrinking that
regulatory rampage.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Does his
thinking change
when it's just not Oklahoma and
a specific
industry that he's protecting as
state's attorney
general, but now the entire
country that has
lots of different sources of
energy, but also
a much larger constituency?
MYRON EBELL: Yes, of course.
But the Trump campaign wasn't
just about Oklahoma
or the oil and gas industry.
It was about rebuilding our
resource and manufacturing
industries across the heartland
of America.
And that is going to require
putting EPA regulations
back in their place, so that
they're concerned
with air and water pollution,
and not destroying
jobs.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Myron Ebell from
the Competitive Enterprise
Institute, Jeremy
Symons from the Environmental
Defense Fund,
thank you both.
MYRON EBELL: Thank you.
JEREMY SYMONS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On January 27,
the president's
executive order banning travel
from seven
Muslim-majority nations went
into effect,
throwing plans to travel to the
U.S. into
chaos for many people in the
Middle East.
Right afterward, we introduced
you to one
Iraqi man who had long worked
for the American
military, whose plans to
immigrate here with
his family were suddenly
canceled.
Tonight, from Southern
California, special
correspondent Marcia Biggs
brings us this
update.
MARCIA BIGGS: This is the day
Abdul Hamid
Abdul Ghani and his family have
waited years
for.
They're driving towards the
airport in Irbil,
Northern Iraq.
ABDUL HAMID ABDUL GHANI,
Immigrant: I feel
like a big burden is off my
shoulder, and
I can take my family to a place
where I can
feel safe.
MARCIA BIGGS: Abdul Hamid and
his family are
finally coming to the U.S., on
special immigrant
visas issued to Iraqis who
worked for the
U.S. military.
He spent nine years as an
interpreter for
the U.S. military, at great
personal risk,
even finding himself on a kill
list back in
2006.
Yet he still proudly wears the
American flag.
Did you like working with the
Americans?
ABDUL HAMID ABDUL GHANI: Oh, I
loved it.
The brotherhood they have, this
type of mentality,
like we are one team and one
fight.
They never gave me this
impression like, you
are not one of us, or you are
just an interpreter
and you're going to do your job,
and they're
going to leave me behind.
MARCIA BIGGS: Three weeks ago,
with bags packed
and having sold everything he
owned, he got
the news that President Trump's
executive
order on immigration meant that
the visa he
had waited almost six years to
get would be
canceled.
ABDUL HAMID ABDUL GHANI: I
really was shocked,
like somebody just popped me in
the head.
I was like, it's over.
All the dreams that I had,
everything that
I planned has just vanished from
my life.
Even my little kids kept asking
me or looking
at the TV and he was like, hey,
daddy, why
is Trump stopping us?
Why is this guy stopping us from
going to
the States?
And I had no answer for him.
MARCIA BIGGS: Because you
believed in this
brotherhood that you had been a
part of for
so long?
ABDUL HAMID ABDUL GHANI:
Exactly.
I have had this feeling like
someone is going
to stand for me.
And the America that I know is
totally different
from the decisions that have
been made lately
by those executive orders.
And I was like, this is not
America.
MARCIA BIGGS: Someone did stand
up for him.
Protests erupted all over the
country.
And just under a week later, the
Pentagon
recommended that the ban be
amended to allow
visa holders who worked for the
U.S. military
to immigrate.
So, once again, the family
prepared to travel.
And half-a-world away, another
family is preparing.
Sattar Khidir, one of Abdul
Hamid's best friends,
has been living here in San
Diego for the
last 5.5 years.
As a former contractor for the
U.S. Air Force,
he immigrated on the same type
of visa.
Abdul Hamid helped him and many
others fill
out their visa applications.
MARCIA BIGGS: And he did all of
this just
out of the kindness of his
heart?
SATTAR KHIDIR, Immigrant: Yes.
MARCIA BIGGS: He's a good man.
SATTAR KHIDIR: He is a great
man.
MARCIA BIGGS: So, is this an
opportunity to
give back to him?
SATTAR KHIDIR: Yes.
I will do whatever it costs to
just help him
out.
I will do my best.
MARCIA BIGGS: It hasn't been
easy for Sattar,
either.
He arrived in 2011, and has
struggled to find
steady work in an area of the
country where
the cost of living is high.
SATTAR KHIDIR: Some people, they
don't know
how is life in California.
Nice weather, I know.
It's nice weather.
But then what are you going to
do?
You have to search for a job.
And there's no jobs.
MARCIA BIGGS: And you have told
him this?
You have been honest with him?
SATTAR KHIDIR: Yes.
Yes.
I told him.
I told him, Abdul Hamid, I speak
five language.
You speak barely three language.
I can't find any jobs for me
like translating
because there is a lot of
translators over
here.
MARCIA BIGGS: Abdul Hamid and
his family are
moving to this suburb of San
Diego, which
has more Iraqi refugees than
anywhere else
in the United States.
This main street could be in
Anytown, USA,
yet it's been nicknamed Little
Baghdad.
In the last five years, over
8,000 Iraqi refugees
have been resettled in the
greater San Diego
area.
That's almost 10 percent of
total arrivals
nationwide.
A local resettlement agency has
found Abdul
Hamid an apartment, but it's not
ready yet.
And the rent is $1,500 a month,
almost a quarter
of a one-time allowance given to
them by the
State Department.
MARCIA BIGGS: So, this is where
they will
be staying?
SATTAR KHIDIR: Yes.
MARCIA BIGGS: While he waits,
Sattar, his
wife and two children are making
space in
their two-bedroom apartment for
Abdul Hamid's
family of five.
MARCIA BIGGS: This is your room?
SATTAR KHIDIR: Yes.
MARCIA BIGGS: And now your whole
family's
going to be in here?
SATTAR KHIDIR: Yes.
(LAUGHTER)
MARCIA BIGGS: It's going to be
tight.
SATTAR KHIDIR: Yes, I know that,
but we're
going to be fine.
This is what I can do.
And we will have fun.
MARCIA BIGGS: You will have fun?
SATTAR KHIDIR: Yes.
MARCIA BIGGS: Back in Iraq, the
family sets
off on the 24-hour journey to
the other side
of the world.
It's an emotional departure.
WOMAN (through translator): We
hope life will
be better.
We hope our children's education
will be better.
But I'm so sad that I won't be
able to see
my mother.
MARCIA BIGGS: And fear is never
far from their
minds.
ABDUL HAMID ABDUL GHANI: I
always had this
doubt, like, because it
happened.
It happened like a couple weeks
ago.
Some people were airborne and
they have been
stopped from entering into the
United States.
I absolutely had this fear like
maybe something
is going to pop up at the very
end of my journey.
MARCIA BIGGS: It was a
nail-biter on this
end as well.
But, finally, the moment Abdul
Hamid says
he'd been worried would never
happen.
ABDUL HAMID ABDUL GHANI: When I
first got
off from the airport and I
looked around to
see Sattar and I actually saw
him, it's kind
of hard for men to cry, but I
actually cried.
It was an amazing moment.
It's something that I'm not
going to forget
it in my lifetime.
I will never forget that moment.
MARCIA BIGGS: The morning after,
a hectic
and happy scene in the kitchen,
old friends
reunited over the breakfast
table, but in
a new world.
ABDUL HAMID ABDUL GHANI: First
thing in the
morning, I took a step outside
and took a
really long breath and looked
around.
And I told myself, yes, it is
true, and I
am here in the United States of
America.
MARCIA BIGGS: What do you want
for your family
in general?
ABDUL HAMID ABDUL GHANI: I want
a brighter
future for my family, especially
my Down syndrome
kid.
And what I'm most worried about,
if they start
talking about this ban again or
they start
-- if anybody starts to make a
difference
between all of these types of
religion, like
-- or make it hard for Muslims,
then I'm going
to be suffering.
MARCIA BIGGS: You're more
worried about discrimination
than you are about getting a job
and an apartment
and...
ABDUL HAMID ABDUL GHANI: Yes, I
know.
I know it's meant for me to be
here.
So, I'm kind of worried about
getting a job,
but I will get a job one day
soon, hopefully.
Like the Iraqis say, inshallah.
MARCIA BIGGS: But with the goal
of finally
reaching this country, the fear
began to settle
in.
With little money and a small
dispensation
from the government, Abdul Hamid
has to make
a life for his family.
ABDUL HAMID ABDUL GHANI: I know
there's a
lot of folks who are coming out
here as immigrants
and as refugees.
So I know the opportunity of
getting a job
is going to be hard.
But I believe in myself and I
believe in my
destiny.
And I think I will be good.
I will do my best to be good.
MARCIA BIGGS: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Marcia Biggs in San Diego,
California.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Public opinion
polls show
we live in a deeply divided
country, particularly
when it comes to politics.
It's been four months since the
election,
and just a few weeks into the
new Trump administration.
So how are voters responding?
The "NewsHour"'s William
Brangham is just
back from a reporting trip to
Texas.
He's here with me now.
So, what exactly did you set out
to do?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: We wanted to
talk to voters
on both sides of the political
spectrum.
So, we were in Texas.
We went to two very different
places.
And I asked people basically
four or five,
six questions, identical
questions in both
places.
And, as you will see, it's as if
voters are
living in two completely
different worlds.
Let's take a look.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Bellville,
Texas is a small
rural town an hour's drive from
Houston.
Its streets are lined with
single-family homes
and locally owned shops.
But a recently-renamed
restaurant in town
has become something of an
attraction, the
Trump Cafe.
So, you changed the name to
Trump Cafe two
weeks before the election?
SUE HAWA, Owner, Trump Cafe:
Before, yes,
sir.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And what if
Trump hadn't
won the election?
SUE HAWA: We don't -- you know,
actually,
we pray for God to he wins.
I'm so glad he win.
I'm so glad, you know?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So if Hillary
Clinton had
won, would this be Clinton Cafe?
SUE HAWA: No, I will move back
home.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Sue Hawa owns
the place
with her husband.
Trump memorabilia is everywhere.
The big seller on the menu is
the Trump Burger,
onion rings, barbecue sauce,
bacon, topped
with an American flag.
As you might imagine, the Trump
Cafe is full
of Trump supporters; 80 percent
of the county
here voted for the president.
How was election night for you?
PHIL OXLEY, Texas: Oh, it was
great.
Man, I was on cloud nine.
I was a Trump guy from day one.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Is that right?
Day one?
PHIL OXLEY: Yes, from day one.
Soon as he said it, I was like,
we need something
other than a politician.
JOYCE KNOLLE, Texas: I was so
excited when
he won, because I just believed
in everything
that he says.
And we were so ready for a
change, and he
listened to the people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A hundred
miles west, and
a political world apart, is
Austin, the state
capital, a liberal outpost in
this red state.
We visited what is perhaps
Austin's version
of the Trump Cafe, the Bouldin
Creek Cafe,
a vegetarian place in South
Austin.
Two-thirds of the county here
voted for Hillary
Clinton.
Chesley Allen is the general
manager.
CHESLEY ALLEN, Bouldin Creek
Cafe: It's kind
of the nexus, or the heart of
what people
think of when they think of
Austin as the
offbeat, funky, keep Austin
weird, that sort
of thing.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's where
we are?
CHESLEY ALLEN: That's where you
are.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The day after
President
Trump's inauguration, the cafe
donated profits
to the ACLU, the Southern
Poverty Law Center
and Planned Parenthood.
ISHRAT KUNDAWALA, Texas: Because
I'm pretty
sure that I fit almost every
demographic that's
going to be ruined by this
administration,
and I feel like I have to speak
out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What was
election night
like for you?
ISHRAT KUNDAWALA: Brutal,
devastating, heartbreaking.
KRYSTLE PAPIC, Texas: If I were
to have a
nightmare that night, then my
nightmare would
be a reality, because I
definitely didn't
want Trump to win.
DYLAN STONECIPHER, Texas: My big
fear with
him is that he is coming out
fast and hard
with a lot of big stuff, but I
really, truly
believe that he is just trying
to tire out
his opposition.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: To spend a few
hours in
these two places, talking to
people on either
side of the political divide, is
to see just
how deep the chasm is in our
politics.
What have you made of his
Cabinet picks so
far?
WOMAN: I love every one of them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Every one of
them?
WOMAN: I love Betsy DeVos.
I love her.
I hope she does something about
education.
I love Sessions, Jeff Sessions.
He is not a racist.
It's just ridiculous.
ISHRAT KUNDAWALA: I don't know
how he could've
picked more unqualified people
to run things
like the Education Department,
or Rick Perry
for Energy.
It's a direct mirror of how much
money -- how
much of a role money plays in
politics.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The politics
of the team
running the White House,
including Steve Bannon,
former chairman of Breitbart
News, has been
a source of controversy.
There's been a lot of questions
raised recently
about Steve Bannon.
What is your...
WOMAN: I love Steve Bannon.
I think he's great.
He says what he says, means what
he says.
And that's why they don't like
him.
People who are just namby-pamby
little me,
me, they don't like people who
are outspoken.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You have any
thoughts on
Steve Bannon?
MAN: Yes.
He's the devil incarnate.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The devil
incarnate?
MAN: Yes, he got the man
elected.
And so I guess he got a payback,
so he made
himself an adviser.
But everything he stands for, I
do not.
WOMAN: I have a lot of Muslim
friends, and
friends who are also people of
color, and
so it's just very disturbing to
me how it
could have progressed to such a
state.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Patrons of
these restaurants
are also split on the news they
trust.
What are your three or four main
sources of
news?
ISHRAT KUNDAWALA: I would say
The Guardian,
CNN, and, ironically -- I,
ironically, like
PBS and NPR.
So, I listen to NPR every
morning.
PHIL OXLEY: I think it's great
that he's on
Twitter, because now we know
what he is thinking
every day.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: No filter
there.
PHIL OXLEY: Yes, there's no
filter.
DON BOYLE, Texas: It's pretty
much a bet that
a mainline journalist is going
to be not a
conservative, be more in the
school of being
progressive and everything.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Where are the
main sources
of -- when you want to find out
what is going
on?
WOMAN: FOX.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: FOX News.
WOMAN: I will not look at CNN.
I get ill.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Straight-up
FOX News viewer.
WOMAN: Yes.
MAN: I'll tell you what I did.
I have a brother that watches
FOX News constantly.
And it's on 24 hours a day, I
think, at his
house.
They came here to Austin to
visit me over
Christmas, and the room he was
staying in
has a TV.
And on the cable box, I blocked
that station.
PHIL OXLEY: I have a sister who
can't stand
the guy, and we still talk, but
I try not
to talk politics with her.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, she's
still your sister,
though?
PHIL OXLEY: Yes, she's still my
sister.
She's always going to be my
WOMAN: We just don't discuss it.
(LAUGHTER)
WOMAN: We don't get into
politics.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You know each
other's views,
and you don't talk about it?
WOMAN: Yes.
I respect their views and I
don't -- we just
don't talk politics.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The couple who
runs the
Trump Cafe say there's a reason
they're open
to all diners.
Their own story seems to cross
political divides.
So you're a Palestinian Muslim
couple that
owns a cafe in Texas named the
Trump Cafe.
You understand how some people
might think,
that sounds like a bizarre
combination.
SUE HAWA: I like my president.
Actually, I like him because
he's a businessman.
He know how to do business, you
know?
And, actually, what he is trying
to do, it's
excellent.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Now, do you
let Democrats
eat here?
SUE HAWA: You know, welcome to
-- yes, you
know, welcome to everyone like
to come inside
my restaurant.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Right.
SUE HAWA: My door open for
everybody, you
know, Republican, Democratic,
same, you know.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For the "PBS
NewsHour,"
I'm William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the
analysis of Shields
and Brooks.
That is syndicated columnist
Mark Shields
and New York Times columnist
David Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
David, to you first.
That was quite a report from
William Brangham,
two towns in Texas, two groups
of people,
both sides of the political
aisle.
What does it tell you about just
how divided
this country is?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, welcome to
life in America
these days.
For those of us who have been
traveling around,
that's reality.
And two things strike me.
The first is, politics is based
on social
identity, and so, again, there
is going to
be differences between rural and
urban and
between left and right.
But what's at the core, why is
the chasm so
wide between the two and why are
the two universes
almost non-overlapping?
It's like whether we're just
in-group, out-group,
or is there some cultural or
ethnic or racial
divide that's at the bottom of
this?
It's very hard to figure out
what unconsciously
is making people so fervently in
one universe
or the other.
But whether it's an identity
politics thing,
or just we that like to form
groups and we
like to unify our group by
hating some other
group, that's the world we're
in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Mark, they
couldn't have
been more divided than they
were.
MARK SHIELDS: They weren't.
They were characteristically
Texan.
They were outspoken.
They didn't hide their
allegiance or their
enmities.
And I thought a particular act
of fraternal
love was disabling the FOX News
Channel when
his brother came to visit over
Christmas,
not exactly a loving act, it
would seem, but
something that he boasted about
to William
on national television.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what all of
them are
reacting to is what's been going
on here in
Washington, David, certainly
during the campaign,
but since.
We heard them saying they love
-- the ones
who like Donald Trump, they love
his Cabinet
picks.
They like his staff.
But during this past week, the
president's
had a rough go of it, certainly
losing his
national security adviser,
Michael Flynn being
forced out, and then the man the
president
wanted to have replace him
announce publicly
that he wasn't going to take the
job.
What do you make of how the
president did
this week?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, to me, the
big chasm of
the week is the gap between the
circus act
and the substance.
The press conference was its own
thing.
It's like some exploding nebula
of madness.
I thought it was just mildly
deranged, just
the epitome of nonlinear
thinking.
Let's put it that way.
But what strikes me is, we have
got to remember,
what is the guy actually doing?
And here we have an
administration where he's
making a lot of press
conferences, but, on
the substantive picks, he
doesn't have a national
security adviser.
There are 691 confirmable
positions in the
White House.
The Trump administration has not
even come
up with names and nominees for
631 out of
those 691.
So there is nobody there, nobody
in the shop,
no policy-making being made.
And so I compare it to, so, you
know, Trump
is sitting on the control deck
of the starship
Enterprise, and he can push a
lot of pretty
buttons, but those buttons
aren't connected
to anything.
And so nothing is happening.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Mark, what's
getting the
attention, though -- David may
be right, but
what is getting the attention is
what the
president was saying this week,
and this very
public departure of his national
security
adviser, one of the -- any
president's closest
advisers, Michael Flynn.
MARK SHIELDS: And certainly one
of this president's
closest and most loyal
supporters, I mean,
spoke at the confirmation and
was in consideration
for vice president.
So, this wasn't just a late
connection.
And the irony to me, Judy, was
that Michael
Flynn, the reason for his
leaving wasn't that
he had misled the vice president
about his
conversations with the Soviet --
the Russian
ambassador -- excuse me -- about
sanctions
or possibly sanctions and
retaliation, but
the fact that the president knew
about it,
had been informed about it, and
Mike Pence,
the vice president, only learned
about being
dissembled to, if one can be
dissembled to,
by the national security adviser
through the
free press.
So it wasn't the act itself.
It was the public exposure of
the act.
So, it was bizarre.
He doesn't have a successor.
And I just think, more than
anything else,
what we're seeing in this
administration,
Judy, is campaigns are fun.
Campaigns are police escorts,
they're airplanes,
they're crowds, they're
balloons, they're
bands, a lot of fun.
You speak in vague generalities.
You get applause for slogans.
And then governing comes.
And governing is tedious and
it's difficult
an it's time-consuming and it
demands your
attention.
And policy isn't vague
generalities.
It's specifics and it's based on
knowledge.
And I will say this.
This White House is preciously
scarce on attention.
And I just don't think the
president -- I
think the president at that
press conference
you talked about really returned
to the campaign
station.
He wants to do it again
Saturday.
It's back to the balloons and
the bands and
the cheers.
That's fun.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, meanwhile,
David ,there
all these -- this controversy
swirl around.
What, are there are seven or
eight different
investigations going on about
whether there
is a connection between the
Trump campaign
and Russia, looking at whether
it was campaign
officials, whether it was
Michael Flynn's
talking to the ambassador?
I mean, there are some very real
concerns
out there that are hanging over
this administration.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, there are
three Russia
scandals all at once.
And to me, the most significant
is the contacts
the administration -- or Trump
campaign may
have had with Russian
intelligence during
the campaign.
And so we know they did have
contacts.
We don't know the content of
those contacts.
If there is collaboration, if
there is some
sort of quotation suggesting
they got tipped
off about some of the leaks or
something else,
that would be a cataclysmic
scandal, and it
would just rock the whole
administration.
My instinct from talking to
people in the
intelligence community is that
there probably
is no great quote showing Paul
Manafort getting
a specific tipoff from the
Russians, because
we would already have had it by
now.
There are so many intelligence
officials to
my newspaper and The Washington
Post, they
probably would have leaked it.
I don't have any inside New York
Times information
about that.
But that would be just a
momentous scandal.
And that is just like -- that
was four days
ago, and we have almost
forgotten it.
But there is a whole series of
scandals ratcheting
it up on the administration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it possible,
Mark, the press,
all of us are making too much of
all this
Russia concern?
MARK SHIELDS: It is, Judy, but
the only two
entities and news sources that
deny Russia's
involvement and malicious
involvement in the
election of a United States
president and
attempt to influence the outcome
appear to
be Vladimir Putin's Russia and
Donald Trump,
who calls this a Russian ruse.
And I don't have inside
information on what
went on.
But there was -- there is enough
at this point
that I think it puts the
Republicans in Congress
in a terribly defensive crouch.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, you
started out with
some pretty strong language
describing the
news conference.
I wrote down.
And you said he came across --
the president
came across as mildly deranged.
Did you really mean that?
DAVID BROOKS: I will walk that
back a little.
Unmoored.
Is that walking it back?
I don't know.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: It was -- if we
were not -- it's
just he's not coherently
speaking as a president
should who's going to be
carefully giving
orders, who's going to be
uniting the American
people.
He is speaking as someone who's
involved in
a junior high school
gladiatorial attack on
the press.
And parts were bizarre and
somewhat offensive,
picking on an African-American
reporter and
assuming she knew people in the
Congressional
Black Caucus, because I guess
all African-American
people are supposed to know each
other.
That's offensive.
But then the attack on the
press, highlighted
by the tweets today saying that
my newspaper,
NBC, all these organizations are
enemies of
the people.
Well, if you want to draw
rhetoric straight
out of the fascist playbook,
we're enemies
of the vote, the people, that is
like -- that
has so many historical echoes.
It's illiberal and offensive to
the way democracy
is supposed to work and how one
is supposed
to just act within the
institutions of democracy.
So, within that context, I think
some strong
language, to me, is merited.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Mark, Donald
Trump was
critical of the press throughout
the campaign,
and he won.
So, the American people -- and
we heard William
Brangham talking to voters in
Texas who have
completely different views of
which parts
of the news media they listen
to.
Could this be a winning strategy
on the president's
part?
MARK SHIELDS: I don't think so,
Judy.
He ran against Hillary Clinton.
He ran -- that was his opponent.
And the tough thing about a
campaign being
over is, you lose your enemy.
President Barack Obama, at this
point in his
presidency in 2009 was on his
way already
to having passed the bailout,
the economic
bailout.
He passed the equal pay.
He was on the way to health
care.
This is the time you build
coalitions.
Donald Trump is spending his
time, his energy,
precious time, really, and just
creating these
new enemies or trying to look
for a villain
like Hillary Clinton was that he
could run
against.
He just -- he needs that as an
organizing
principle.
Without an organizing principle
of an enemy,
the press is a punching bag,
it's unpopular,
yes.
It doesn't approach the sense of
villainy
that he's looking for.
And I just don't think it will
wash long-term
as a political strategy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, do you
think that's
what he's doing?
And do you agree with Mark, it's
not going
to work in the long run?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I think it
offends 65
percent or 70 percent of the
American people,
but, as we just saw from Texas,
it pleases
35 percent of the people.
And so I think he can hang along
with that
35 percent of the people for a
good long time.
And I have been asking around
Republicans
on the Hill, are they worried?
And, personally, they are
worried, but there
will be no distance between
Republicans on
the Hill and Donald Trump any
time soon.
Among Republicans, according to
a Pew poll,
82 percent of Republicans right
now support
Donald Trump, which is higher
than supported
Ronald Reagan at this time in
his administration.
And so Republicans like the guy;
35 percent
of Americans see this and they
say, yes, way
to go.
So, it will not be a majority
coalition.
It will not be a governing
coalition, but
he will retain, if he continues
it this way,
some solid base of support.
MARK SHIELDS: Let me disagree
just a little
with David.
What Republicans have going
against them is
history.
Judy, when a president, a
sitting president,
has his job rating in the Gallup
poll, his
approval rating, drop below 50
percent, that
president's party loses an
average of 37 seats
in the House of Representatives
in the next
midterm election.
When a president is above 50
percent, they
lose an average of 14 seats.
All right?
By the end of this year, the 1st
of January,
Republicans are going to be
looking, Donald
Trump is 35.
This is his honeymoon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A new Gallup poll
has him in
the mid-30s.
MARK SHIELDS: Gallup poll has it
at 38.
He's at that point now.
And it's hard to see how he goes
higher without
some international crisis that
galvanized
totally, national unanimity.
So, January, his window of
opportunity to
pass something big -- and these
are difficult,
tricky, complicated issues he's
trying to
write legislation for -- is
between now and
December.
By the 1st of January, members
of the party
on the Hill start thinking about
themselves
and they have to establish
independence from
an unpopular person in the White
House.
They have got to think about
getting reelected.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ten seconds,
David.
It sounds like the clock is
ticking.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, but they're
living in a
hermetically sealed Republican
universe, just
as Democrats are.
And so they're responding to
their own universe,
even if it leads to electoral
downfall, as
Mark suggests.
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK.
David Brooks, Mark Shields,
thank you both.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you, Judy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally: An
actor at the
heart of the Oscars-so-white
controversy takes
on a new role based on a true
story set in
colonial Africa.
Jeffrey Brown has the story from
Los Angeles.
It's part of our occasional
series Beyond
the Red Carpet.
DAVID OYELOWO, Actor: I'm not
asking for an
answer this very second.
All I ask of you is that you go
away and think
about it.
JEFFREY BROWN: In 1947 London,
Seretse Khama,
played by David Oyelowo,
proposes to Ruth
Williams, played by actress
Rosamund Pike.
ROSAMUND PIKE, Actress: I know
what you're
asking.
Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Their races make
the relationship
fraught.
But there's more: He is a prince
in his tribe
in Southern Africa expected to
return to lead
his people, and their marriage
will have international
consequences.
"A United Kingdom" is based on a
true story,
and it was Oyelowo who first
learned of it
in a book titled "Color Bar" by
Susan Williams.
More than just the film's star,
he was the
producer who brought director
Amma Asante
and others into the project.
DAVID OYELOWO: What was
indisputable to me
was the power of the love
between these two
people, and it was that very
thing that helped
them overcome so many of these
insurmountable
obstacles and odds that they
faced.
And, you know, as someone who is
a real believer
in love myself, and I mean, love
in the truest
sense, not movie love.
I'm talking about the
unglamorous stuff of
sacrifice, of courage.
JEFFREY BROWN: I must say this
film has movie
love, because it's love at first
sight almost,
right?
DAVID OYELOWO: But, you see, the
thing about
that is that we even have a name
for it, the
meet-cute.
You know, we have turned it into
something
that is so fantastical and so
inaccessible
that it has become fairy
tale-like.
But, actually, what can happen
-- it doesn't
happen every day, admittedly --
is that two
people see beyond their race,
see beyond their
cultural differences and their
national differences.
And they just -- two souls meet.
We should be fighting for
equality.
That is where we should be
focusing our minds,
not on the wife I have chosen,
who means you
no harm.
JEFFREY BROWN: The historical
characters,
Khama and Williams, become
caught up in colonial-era
politics, as Britain tries to
hold onto the
land that will later become
Botswana, while
maintaining close ties to the
neighboring
apartheid regime of South
Africa.
DAVID OYELOWO: It is
unacceptable that they
use their power to keep us
voiceless.
JEFFREY BROWN: Oyelowo is best
known for his
portrayal of another historical
figure, Martin
Luther King in the film "Selma."
And he starred in a recent film
based on a
true story set in a slum in
Uganda, the "Queen
of Katwe."
Born in England, Oyelowo spent
ages 6 through
13 in Nigeria, before returning
and eventually
becoming a classically trained
stage actor.
He was the first black actor to
play an English
king for the Royal Shakespeare
Company.
He recently returned to
Shakespeare, this
time on Broadway, in "Othello."
I asked what made him want to
take on a role.
DAVID OYELOWO: It's got to
resonate for me,
but, also, I want to make things
that are
synonymous with who I am as a
man and how
I'm bringing up my children, you
know, what
it is I believe in, because this
is a very
powerful medium, culturally,
politically,
familially.
It can shape people's thoughts.
JEFFREY BROWN: I think of this
film and I
think of "Selma" and "Queen of
Katwe," right,
clearly films that have a kind
of larger context
to them, right, a history.
DAVID OYELOWO: Yes, I think that
is also a
key and is crucial to me.
You used the word context there.
Something that is very important
to me is
contextualizing what it is to be
someone who
looks like me on planet Earth.
And by that, I mean a black man.
And I have lived on three
continents as a
black man, and there are
differences.
There are complexities and
dimensions to being
someone like me in all of those
places that
are rarely, in my opinion, seen
on film and
television.
JEFFREY BROWN: To the extent
that you don't
see you that much in the film
world, that
has limited the roles that you
can get?
DAVID OYELOWO: It hasn't because
I have chosen
to do something about it.
You know, I produced "A United
Kingdom," and
I'm pretty sure that's probably
the only way
this film would have got made.
JEFFREY BROWN: Do it yourself.
DAVID OYELOWO: Yes, do it
yourself, and because
I'm very passionate about seeing
a story like
this told.
And passion is what makes you
roll up your
sleeves and get it done.
And passion, I think, can be
contagious.
JEFFREY BROWN: I read that,
early on, you
asked your agent to go after
roles that might
have been written for white
actors, to put
your for them.
DAVID OYELOWO: Yes.
Again, like the producing, it
was born out
of necessity.
When I looked at my white
contemporaries or
the white actors ahead of me, as
a young actor
back then, there was complexity
that made
me see myself in them, even
though they were
white people living a very
different life
to mine.
I was able to identify with what
they were
going through emotionally.
And I couldn't identify
necessarily with what
black characters I saw in films
and TV were
going through, because it was
one-dimensional,
at best two-dimensional.
JEFFREY BROWN: Oyelowo was
directly caught
up in the 2015 Oscars-so-white
controversy
when his critically-acclaimed
performance
in "Selma" failed to receive an
Oscar nomination,
and neither did any other actor
of color.
You said in an interview,
"There's resistance
to films with black
protagonists, especially
if they can't have Denzel
Washington in the
lead role."
DAVID OYELOWO: Right.
That must be qualified with me
saying, he
is one of my heroes, and I will
go anywhere
to see him.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: As would I.
That's not to denigrate him.
He's a great actor.
DAVID OYELOWO: Absolutely.
But, yes, there is a reason why
there's isn't
a plethora of other black actors
that you
could reel off the tip of your
tongue who
-- in that space that he
occupies, which is
that he can play anything.
He's not tied to race as the
prerequisite
for why he gets to be the
protagonist in a
film.
And the resistance is -- I think
is purely
to do with the decision-makers,
you know?
They want to see themselves in
movies, as
we all do.
And so what you see in movies is
a reflection
of those who are making the
decision.
JEFFREY BROWN: But for you,
personally, your
producer role becomes almost as
important,
perhaps, as your acting role.
DAVID OYELOWO: Yes, crucial, in
a sense.
You know, you can either
complain about this
stuff, or you can do what you
can to change
it.
And that's the tack I have
chosen.
JEFFREY BROWN: David Oyelowo,
producer and
actor, stars in the new film "A
United Kingdom"
just out in theaters nationwide.
From Los Angeles, I'm Jeffrey
Brown for the
"PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: The director of an
Oscar-nominated documentary
walks us through his favorite
scene of best
picture nominee "Moonlight."
That's ahead of the Academy
Awards ceremony
next weekend.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And tonight on PBS' "Washington
Week": less
than a month after taking
office, President
Trump facing new questions about
his administration's
relationship with Russia -- a
deep dive into
the president's pushback at
leaks and the
consequences of alternative
facts, later tonight
on "Washington Week."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tomorrow, on
"PBS NewsHour
Weekend": The designation of a
national monument
in the Nevada desert has some
people pushing
for the Trump administration to
undo another
part of the Obama legacy.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Have a great President's Day
Weekend.
Thank you, and we will see you
soon.